```
prose: wip
media: not started
citations: not started
internal_links: not started
```

Grammar Modules
===============

Grammar modules are how parC defines the logic for constructing a morphological parser.
Modules are grouped into the following kinds: **phonology**, **exponence**, **lexicon**, and **morphotactics**.


Phonology
---------

Phonology modules in parC correspond roughly to the proper meaning of phonology in linguistics.
parC uses a generative rule-based framework for phonology.
Namely, underlying representations are transformed into surface forms by the application of an ordered series of rules.
The purpose of the phonology modules is to define what units underlying and surface strings may consist of, and how underlying representations are transformed into surface forms.
There are three phonology modules: :doc:`inventory`, :doc:`rules` and :doc:`patterns`.

Inventory
`````````

The Inventory module defines the possible **phones** and **symbols** that may make up the underlying and surface.
Here **phone** corresponds closest to the *surface alphabet* in Koskenniemi (!CITE).
It may be a phone proper (i.e. an IPA character indicating a phoneme or the surface realization of a phoneme) or a grapheme, depending on the user's preference and the indended usage of the parser.
Phones appear in both underlying and surface strings.
A **symbol** corresponds closest to an archiphoneme or morphophoneme, also following Koskenniemi (!CITE), or to a lexical diacritic in generative phonology (!CITE).
Symbols are restricted to underlying strings in parC, and are used to control the application of rules or morphological operations.
For example, the ``[TBU]`` symbol is used for Tira to indicate a tone-bearing unit whose tone has not yet been assigned.

Phones and symbols are grouped under **classes** in parC, where each class is indicated with a shorthand in angle brackets.
For example, we may use ``<C>`` as the shorthand referring to all consonants.
Classes may be also be nested (!TODO: screenshot of inventory page).
For example, ``<C>`` may have a subclass ``<R>`` containing all resonant consonants.
The angle bracket shorthand may be used as a **pattern string** indicating any member of the class.
In Figure !TODO, the symbol ``<C>`` can be used to refer to "p, t, m, r, l, ..." or any other consonants, ``<N>`` to refer to "m, n, ŋ", ``<R>`` to refer to "r, l, w, j" and so on.
Pattern strings are described further in :doc:`patterns`.

Patterns
````````

The Patterns module allows the user to define a shorthand that represents a set of strings concisely.
For example, we may wish to reference all non-high vowels using a single symbol.
Assuming in the Inventory we defined the class of mid vowels using ``<V_Mid>`` and the class of low vowels using ``<V_Low>`` we can create a new pattern ``<V_NonHigh>`` defined with the expression ``<V_Mid>|<V_Low>``, where the pipe operator ``|`` indicates *disjunction* (i.e. logical "or": either a mid vowel or a low vowel).

A pattern is, in mathematical terms, a regular language.
A regular language is a set of strings that can be generated by a regular expression.
A regular expression, in turn, is a notation for representing atomic strings (e.g. letters, numbers and punctuation) as well as operations over strings, such as disjunction, negation, or closure.
By design, the shorthand for an inventory class is a disjunction over all members of the class, i.e. ``<C>`` is a disjunction over all consonants.

Patterns may be used to define other patterns, like the example above with ``<V_NonHigh>`` defined as ``<V_Mid>|<V_Low>``.
Suppose we define a pattern for a syllable e.g. ``<Syll>`` with definition ``C?VC*`` meaning "one or zero consonants followed by a single vowel and zero or arbitrarily many consonants."
We could create a pattern for a bisyllabic word ``<BiSyllWord>`` by concatenating the syllable shorthand twice and adding word boundary markers, i.e. ``#<Syll><Syll>#``

Rules
`````

The Rules module allows the user to specify context-sensitive rewrite operations.
These correspond to operations in Sound Patterns of English (SPE) (!CITE), in that they define an input string, output string, left context and right context.
Here we use the term "string" though to be technically precise the input, output and context for a rule may be defined as a regular language rather than a single string.
SPE provides a single-line notation for representing a context-sensitive rule, e.g. (t,d) > ɾ / V_V[-stress], parsed as "the phonemes /t,d/ are transformed into an alveolar tap [ɾ] between two vowels where the following vowel is unstressed."
Here (t,d) is the input string, ɾ the output string, V is the left context and V[-stress] the right (!TODO verify notation vis-a-vis SPE paper).

Three kinds of rules are supported in parC: simple rule, string map and rule sequence.
A simple rule maps a single input to a single output given some left and right context.
The input, output and context strings are defined equivalently to patterns, that is a pattern symbol like ``<V_NonHigh>`` may be used in a rule definition as may operators like disjunction, negation or optionality.
For example, the input string for the intervocalic tapping rule in English could be defined as ``t|d`` or ``{td}``.
String map rules define a list of input-output mappings rather than a single input-output pair but are otherwise identical to simple rules.
A rule sequence defines a cascade of rules that must be defined elsewhere.
Rule sequences do not have a left or right context to control application, but instead rely on the contexts specified for each constituent rule.

!TODO add rule examples and UI captures

Exponence
---------

Exponence modules in parC define the inventory of morphological features for a language as well as the morphemes and operations that expone those features.
Note that, unlike the :doc:`morphotactics` modules, exponence modules do not specify anything about the which features, morphemes or operations are relevant for a given root or part of speech.
Rather, exponence only defines the set of features, morphemes and operations that are "available" for the language, and the association to particular lexical items is handled in the :doc:`morphotactics` modules.

Feature Definition
``````````````````

The Feature Definition module allows the user to define morphological features and their possible values.
For example, we define a morphological feature ``tam`` (Tense-Aspect-Mood) for Tira with values ``ipfv`` (imperfective), ``pfv`` (perfective), ``imp`` (imperative), ``dep`` (dependent), and ``inf`` (infinitive).

Features in this module may be *bona fide* inflectional features or lexical diacritics (!TODO citation + relevant theoretical contextualization).
For example, verbs in Tira are grouped into various inflectional classes based on the set of final vowel (FV) suffixes that attach.
The set of inflectional classes are labeled *aɔ*, *ao*, *ai*, *ɔɔ*, *ɔu*, *ɔi*.
To represent these classes, we add a feature ``fv_class`` with values ``aɔ, ao`` etc.
No distinction is made in the Feature Definition module between inflectional or lexical features.
Rather, their difference lies in how the user applies each feature in various other submodules.
For example the :doc:`morpheme-set`, :doc:`feature-markers` and :doc:`contingent-feature-markers` modules allow the user to specify particular morphemes (for morpheme set) or morphological operations (for feature markers and contingent feature markers) that make up the realization of some inflectional features.
Likewise, the :doc:`lexicon` module allows the user to specify a set of inflectional features realized for a given part of speech as well as a set of lexical features that must be specified for each word belonging to that part of speech.

Morpheme Set
```````````

The Morpheme Set module allows for the user to specify a set of morphemes that expone a set of inflectional features.
The user may pick any amount of features, e.g. to specify a set of suffixes marking both person and number.
For each morpheme the user adds, they may control the associated inflectional features using a set of dropdown menus for each feature.
Also note that the input for a morpheme is interpreted in the same way as a :doc:`pattern` string.
This can be useful if the user needs to specify optionality or free variation.
For example, the English factive suffix *-ize/ise* may be written ``i{sz}e`` to indicate the alternation between the ``s/z`` graphemes.

Feature Markers
```````````````

Where the Morpheme Set module gives a relation between morphemes and associated inflectional features, the Feature Markers module defines a relation between *morphological operations* and inflectional features.
Morphological operation here denotes...


Lexicon
-------

Morphotactics
-------------
